Do you gossip?
No.
Well, whenever we share
any news about others,
that is a form of gossip.
Because we are interested in others,
we might say,
“I am really concerned
about Brother Smith’s health,”
or “Did you hear about Sister Brown’s
experience in the ministry?”
Is this type of gossip harmful?
Generally not.
Still, we need to be careful.
At 1 Timothy 5:13,
Paul spoke out against certain sisters
who were “gossipers
and meddlers in other people’s affairs.”
We do not need to know
and share everything we know
about what’s happening
in other people’s lives.
What if, for example,
Brother Smith did not want others
to know details about his health problem?
We need to respect the privacy of others.
Or what if talking
about Sister Brown’s experience turns into,
“Oh, you know, she always brags
about her success in the ministry.”
When our talk about others turns negative,
it can develop into slander.
Slander is making
deliberate, false statements
that damage another’s reputation.
Let’s now consider
how harmful gossip wrecks peace.
If you have spread harmful gossip
about someone and he hears about it,
when you see him the next time,
what will be the look on his face?
Please read with me Proverbs 25:23:
“The north wind brings a downpour,
and a gossiping tongue brings an angry face.”
The north wind in Palestine
brought dark clouds and rain.
Likewise, when the one you gossiped about
catches wind of this and he sees you,
he will have a gloomy, angry face.
There will be a storm
and a chilled relationship.
Now, when that happens,
you may feel very badly and apologize,
but you may have damaged his reputation
in a way that may be difficult to undo.
Listen to this old Jewish story:
‘A man went about town
slandering the town’s wise man.
‘Later, the malicious gossiper
realized his wrong
‘and went to the wise man
and asked for his forgiveness.
‘He offered to do
whatever was needed to make amends.
‘The wise man made one request.
‘He told the gossiper
to take a feather pillow,
‘cut it open,
and scatter the feathers to the wind.
‘Well, the gossiper
was puzzled by this request,
‘but he did as instructed.
‘Then he returned to the wise man.
‘“Am I now forgiven?” he asked.
‘“First, go and gather all the feathers,”
the wise man responded.
‘“But, how can I?
‘The wind has already scattered them.”
‘The wise man replied,
‘“It is as difficult to repair
the damage done by your words
as it is to recover the feathers.”’
Yes, once spoken,
hurtful words cannot be retrieved.
Let’s not scatter feathers in the wind.
If we spread rumors,
it can seriously disturb
the peace of many in the congregation.
We find an example of this
at Acts 21:20, 21.
The older men of the Jerusalem congregation
explained to Paul
that some Jews
had spread a rumor among Jewish Christians
that he had been teaching an apostasy,
speaking against the Law of Moses.
Of course, this was a twisting of the facts.
Paul never spoke disrespectfully of the Law.
He even went to synagogues
where he reasoned
on the basis of the Hebrew Scriptures.
Such stories could have led
some newly converted Jewish Christians
to think that Paul
did not respect God’s arrangements,
and this could have seriously disrupted
the peace of the congregation.
In the following dramatization,
notice the effect
that harmful gossip can have
on the peace in a congregation.
Can you believe that?
Especially as a pioneer,
what kind of example is she setting?
Has Emily stopped following her?
No, not yet, but she probably will.
Alistair, what do you think?
About what?
Haley’s posts on QuicPost.
Is there a problem?
Emily has told me
they’re all just, “Look at me
—my clothes, my hair, my makeup.”
And even Celia agrees with her.
Well, it’s very easy to take things
out of context on social media.
I know that I’ve done that and realized later
that I was wrong.
Yeah, that’s a good point.
Listen, I don’t want to pull you away,
but if you have a minute, would you mind
giving me a hand with these boxes?
Sure.
Thanks for your help.
No problem.
Jake, back in the hall,
I know you were just expressing concern,
but here’s something to consider.
This principle is one of my favorites.
It’s found at Proverbs
chapter 18 and verse 17.
“The first to state his case seems right,
until the other party comes
and cross-examines him.”
I’m not sure I understand.
It just means that sometimes
we only hear one side of a story.
And until we personally hear both,
it’s best not to draw any conclusions.
And even then, if it’s something negative,
we wouldn’t want to spread it
any more than we’d want something spread
about ourselves.
I guess I hadn’t considered that.
Thanks.
I’m going to apologize to Harry and Marie
and have Emily talk directly to Haley.
Good idea.
Did you notice what Jake said
after the elder graciously helped him reason
on Proverbs 18:17?
He said, “I had not considered that.”
Yes, Jake just did not stop and think
before he said
those negative things about Haley.
So how can we “put away” harmful gossip
before it begins?
Let’s read Proverbs 15:28:
“The heart of the righteous one
meditates before answering,
“but the mouth of the wicked
blurts out bad things.”
So before we say bad things about others,
we need to meditate.
No, this does not mean
a long-drawn-out process.
It just requires a little thought.
What thoughts could have stopped Jake
from repeating his wife’s negative view
of Haley’s post?
He could have asked himself:
‘Is what I am about to say true?
‘Is it kind, loving?
‘How will Harry and Marie view Haley
if they hear
those negative things about her?’
Another principle
that will help us to put away harmful gossip
is the so-called Golden Rule,
as recorded at Luke 6:31.
Jesus said: “Just as you
want men to do to you,
do the same way to them.”
This means showing empathy,
putting ourselves
in the place of the other person,
and asking ourselves,
‘How would I feel
if someone said this about me?’
One situation that may tempt us
to engage in harmful gossip
is when we believe we
have been wronged by someone.
Instead of applying the counsel
at Matthew 5:23, 24
and 18:15
to talk to the person privately,
we could start talking about it
to others who are not involved.
Imagine if after finally talking
with the person
you find out he actually
did not wrong you at all.
You will have made the situation much worse.
But whether we are right or wrong,
engaging in hurtful speech
will never improve a situation.
Gossip requires a speaker and a listener.
Is it wrong to listen to harmful gossip?
Yes!
Note what Proverbs 17:4 says:
“A wicked man pays attention
to hurtful speech,
and a deceptive man
listens to a malicious tongue.”
Think about that.
In God’s eyes if we listen to hurtful,
malicious speech, we too
bear a heavy responsibility.
By listening to the gossiper,
we are encouraging him to go on.
So, what should you do?
Without taking on an air
of self-righteousness,
you could simply say,
“Let’s change the subject,”
or “I don’t really feel comfortable
talking about this;
after all, she is not here
to defend herself.”
And if we find that a brother or sister
likes to gossip,
we may find it easier to avoid harmful gossip
by stopping close association
with that person.
Proverbs 20:19 frankly counsels:
“Do not associate
with one who loves to gossip.”
So, dear friends,
let’s put away harmful gossip.
Doing so, we will maintain
our precious peace and unity.
Brother Kenneth Cook,
a member of the Governing Body,
will now present
the final talk of this symposium,
“‘Put Away’ Peace Wreckers
—Uncontrolled Anger.”